Book title: A Girl Called Samson: A Novel





ALSO BY AMY HARMON
Young Adult and Paranormal Romance
Slow Dance in Purgatory
Prom Night in Purgatory
Inspirational Romance
A Different Blue
Running Barefoot
Making Faces
Infinity + One
The Law of Moses
The Song of David
The Smallest Part
Historical Fiction
From Sand and Ash
What the Wind Knows
Where the Lost Wander
The Songbook of Benny Lament
The Unknown Beloved
Romantic Fantasy
The Bird and the Sword
The Queen and the Cure
The First Girl Child
The Second Blind Son



This is a work of fiction. Names, characters, organizations, places, events, and incidents are either products of the author's imagination or are used fictitiously.
Text copyright © 2023 by Amy Sutorius Harmon
All rights reserved.
No part of this book may be reproduced, or stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without express written permission of the publisher.
Published by Lake Union Publishing, Seattle
www.apub.com
Amazon, the Amazon logo, and Lake Union Publishing are trademarks of Amazon.com, Inc., or its affiliates.
ISBN-13: 9781542039741 (paperback)
ISBN-13: 9781542039734 (digital)
Cover design by Faceout Studio, Tim Green
Cover image: ©Joanna Czogala / ArcAngel; ©caesart / Shutterstock; ©swp23 / Shutterstock; ©alexandre zveiger / Shutterstock; ©Raland / Shutterstock; ©VRVIRUS / Shutterstock; ©Fotokvadrat / Shutterstock; ©Chvan Ilona / Shutterstock; ©getgg / Shutterstock; ©Sapan Unhale / Shutterstock; ©Tony Marturano / Shutterstock; ©Josef Hanus / Shutterstock; ©jessicahyde / Shutterstock; ©Vasya Kobelev / Shutterstock

For my daughters

CONTENTS
START READING
January 3, 1827
1 THE COURSE OF HUMAN EVENTS
2 IT BECOMES NECESSARY
3 ONE PEOPLE
4 DISSOLVE THE BANDS
5 OF THE EARTH
6 THE EQUAL STATION
7 THE LAWS OF NATURE
8 THE OPINIONS OF MANKIND
9 DECLARE THE CAUSES
10 THE SEPARATION
11 WE HOLD THESE TRUTHS
12 SELF-EVIDENT
13 ALL MEN
14 CERTAIN UNALIENABLE RIGHTS
15 THE PURSUIT OF HAPPINESS
16 TO SECURE THESE RIGHTS
17 JUST POWERS
18 THE CONSENT OF THE GOVERNED
19 TO ALTER OR ABOLISH
20 LIGHT AND TRANSIENT CAUSES
21 DISPOSED TO SUFFER
22 A LONG TRAIN OF ABUSES
23 PROVIDE NEW GUARDS
24 THE PATIENT SUFFERANCE
25 THE NECESSITY WHICH CONSTRAINS THEM
26 LET FACTS BE SUBMITTED
27 ALL ALLEGIANCE
28 CONCLUDE PEACE
29 THIS DECLARATION
30 DIVINE PROVIDENCE
AUTHOR'S NOTE
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
ABOUT THE AUTHOR

Strength and honor are her clothing; and she shall rejoice in time to come.
Proverbs 31:25

January 3, 1827
Dear Elizabeth,
You have not been far from my mind today. It is a new year, though I suspect it will be my last. I find myself lost in thought more than I am present, and though I've told parts of my story, I've never written it all down from beginning to end.
Many of the things I will write, you already know, but this record will be for your children. And mine. And for generations of little girls who have not even been born.
A newspaper columnist named Herman Mann—he calls himself a novelist—interviewed me at length for a book, and I had hopes that he would write my story as I conveyed it to him. But I find some things are impossible to express, especially to a stranger. The pages he has shared with me bear little resemblance to the tale I lived, and one must understand my history to understand my choices. It is better that I write it myself, even if it shocks sensibilities.
I am accustomed to that.
The records I kept during the final years of the Revolution were scant and insufficient, but the events are burned into my memory, and I relive them in my sleep. It seems like another life, though the remnants of that life are with me still, in my flesh and in my posterity.
I thought nothing could be worse than the small, painful existence I was living. I also feared the war would end, and I would miss my only shot at deliverance. As it turned out, I saw all the bloodshed I could bear. I watched boys die and grown men weep. I saw cowardice reign and bravery falter. And I witnessed what dreams cost, up close and personal.
If I'd known, I might have avoided it all, the pain in my leg and the price of independence—my own and that of my country. But then I wouldn't have met him. And I wouldn't have come to truly know myself.
People ask me why I did it. Mr. Mann kept returning to that question, and I had no simple answer. Such a question demands the entire story. All I know is that once the desire took root in me, it grew and grew, until to deny it would have choked the hope from my breast. And hope is what keeps us alive.
Had I been pretty and small, I might have had different dreams. I've pondered on that many times. Our aspirations are so often influenced by our appearance. I wonder how mine might have changed me.
I was named after my mother, who was named after the biblical prophetess Deborah. But I didn't want to be a prophet. I wanted to be a warrior like Jael, the woman who slayed a mighty general and liberated her people from the fist of oppression. Mostly, I wanted to free myself.
At five years old, I was alone in the world. At eight, I became a servant to a widow who treated me like a dog. At ten, I was indentured to a farmer until I turned eighteen.
It is impossible to describe how it feels to have no say in one's own life, to be at the mercy of others, and to be sent away. I was only a child then, but being bound out marked me deeply and lit a rebellion in my veins I have never quelled.
Maybe that was the moment I became a soldier.
Maybe that was the day it all began.

~ 1 ~
THE COURSE OF HUMAN EVENTS
March 15, 1770
Winter had begun her retreat, but summer was still a long way off, and the horse we rode picked his way over the thawing, gouged road with a bowed head and an uneven gait. The man in front of me shielded me from the bite of early morning, but I huddled in misery behind him, ignoring the crouching countryside and the bare branches prodding the sky for signs of spring. My legs bounced against the horse's flanks, and I tucked my skirts more securely around my knees. My dress was too small, my wool stockings too large, and a patch of skin between the two was being rubbed raw. I wore every piece of clothing I owned and carried a satchel across my back that held a blanket, a hairbrush, and a Bible that had once belonged to my mother.
"Can you read, Deborah?" Reverend Sylvanus Conant asked. He tossed the question over his shoulder like crumbs for a bird. He hadn't spoken since we'd set off, and I considered not answering. On the occasions he had visited Widow Thatcher, he had been kind to me, but today I was angry with him. Today he had come to take me away. Widow Thatcher no longer needed me, and I would be moving again. I would not miss her slaps, the harsh criticisms, or the endless tasks that were never done to her satisfaction, but I had no confidence that my new situation would be any better.
This time, I would be living with a family. Not my family. My family was gone, tossed into the wind and scattered. My brothers and my sister were all in servitude somewhere to someone. Mother couldn't provide for us. She could barely provide for herself. I hadn't seen her in ages, and I would see her even less living in Middleborough.
"Yes. I can read very well," I relented. Conversation was preferable to stewing in my discontent. "My mother taught me when I was four years old."
"Is that so?" he asked. The horse that carried us whinnied in disbelief. I shifted, trying not to cling to the man, but I was not accustomed to riding thus, and the ridge of the old mare's back made an uncomfortable seat.
"My mother said reading is in my blood. She is the great-granddaughter of William Bradford. Do you know William Bradford? He was aboard the Mayflower. The people made him their governor." I felt the need to defend my mother if only to defend myself.
"I do indeed. It is a heritage you can be proud of."
"My father is a Samson. There was a Samson aboard the Mayflower too. Henry Samson. Mother said he came to the New World all alone."
"He must have been very brave."
"Yes. But my father is not brave."
Reverend Conant did not disagree, and I sank into shamed silence, embarrassed by my admission.
"Do you know your Bible?" he asked, as if offering me redemption.
"Yes. And I have memorized the catechisms."
"Oh?"
I began to prattle off the questions and answers outlined by the Assembly of Divines.
"My goodness, child!" he interrupted after several minutes of recitation. I was not finished, but I stopped. Widow Thatcher had been unimpressed by my achievement. She'd scolded me for my pride. I expected the reverend to do the same.
"That is highly commendable," he said instead. "Very impressive."
"I can keep going," I proposed, biting my lips to hide my pleasure. "I know it all."
"And can you write?" he asked.
I hesitated, slightly deflated. Reading was easier than writing, and Widow Thatcher had wanted me to read to her, sometimes for hours on end, but she hadn't been keen on me scratching away at my letters.
"I can," I said. "But not as well as I read. I need more practice."
"It is one thing to read another man's thoughts. It is another to express one's own. And paper is expensive," the reverend said.
"Yes. And I have no money." I was surprised that he'd even asked. I was a girl, after all, and a servant, but his queries made me hopeful.
"Do you think the Thomases might allow me to go to school?" I asked.
It was his turn to hesitate. "Mistress Thomas is sorely in need of help."
I sighed, unsurprised. I would not be going to school.
"But I will bring you books, if you like," he offered.
I came close to toppling from my perch behind him.
"What kind?" I blurted, though I hardly cared. The Bible, the catechisms, and a collection of maps and journals that had belonged to Reverend Thatcher were the only books Widow Thatcher had in her house. I read them all out loud to the old woman, even the journals, though they were filled with sermons and little else. The pages my mother had copied from the records of William Bradford were much more interesting, but I dearly wanted something new.
"What kind of books would you like?" the reverend asked.
"Stories. I would like stories. Adventures."
"All right. And I will bring paper and ink as well so you will have the means to practice your writing. You could compose letters."
"Who will I write to?"
He didn't respond immediately, and I feared I'd been impertinent. Widow Thatcher often accused me of such, though I'd always performed every task to exactness and only spoke when spoken to.
"I would like someone to practice with," I explained. I was hungry for a friend. I'd spent the last five years with old women who were spent and weary. "Perhaps Mistress Thomas will allow that."
"Perhaps." He said no more on the matter, and I did not allow myself to hope that he would do as he promised.
"The Thomases live about two miles from town. It's a good stretch of the legs. Nothing more. They have a farm, a pretty place. You might find it very agreeable."
I looked beyond my misery enough to take in the day around me. The mud of early spring slowed our journey, and the earth sucked at the horse's hooves, but the morning sky was turning blue, the sun had begun to warm my back, and the breeze stirred my pale hair. I'd spent too many days shut inside, hovering near Widow Thatcher so her every command could be attended to. The world beyond those stifling rooms and stagnant air had called to me, and my limbs and lungs had longed for speed and motion. If I'd thought the reverend would allow it, I would've asked to be let down so I could run alongside the horse. I loved to run. But the road was churned up from travel, and I had no confidence that my wishes would be considered, so I swallowed them.
The first time I got a glimpse of the house in the middle of forest and fields, I felt a glimmer of hope. It was well kept, and the windows made a friendly face with the front door and the little gate that separated the yard from the road. The door flew open upon our approach, and a woman, her skirts in hand, ran to greet us, a little black-haired boy on her heels. A burly man, a hat on his head and his sleeves rolled as if he'd just stepped away from his labors, called out to the reverend as we drew to a halt.
"Don't be afraid, Deborah," the reverend said gently. "You will not be mistreated here."
Boys tumbled out of the barn and came in from the fields, boys of all sizes, though most appeared older than me. Reverend Conant seemed to know all their names and greeted each one, but I didn't know which name belonged to whom. There were so many, and I had very little experience with other children, especially boys. They watched their father help me down from the mare, though it was not an inability to disembark as much as trepidation that had kept me rooted to my seat instead of sliding to the ground.
Deacon Jeremiah Thomas wore two frowns, one on his brow and one on his lips, but his wife, Susannah, a woman who barely reached his shoulder, was his opposite in every way. His soberness, I would come to find, was not cruelty. He was not jolly, but he was just, which was a far better quality in my opinion. Susannah Thomas smiled at me and grasped my hands.
"Sylvanus did not tell us you were so grown. You are so tall for ten and already a young woman."
I nodded but did not smile. I expect I looked rather fierce too, though I was simply afraid. She introduced me to her sons, oldest to youngest. Nathaniel, Jacob, and Benjamin were eighteen, seventeen, and sixteen. All three were midheight and slim with dark hair and freckled noses, which they wrinkled at me. I don't know what they were expecting, but I was clearly not it. Elijah was heavier set with lighter hair and an easier smile. He was fourteen, and thirteen-year-old Edward was his mirror image, as if Mrs. Thomas had birthed her sons in sets, whether they were born at the same time or not.
Twelve-year-old Francis and Phineas were actual twins, and the dark hair and sparer frames of their older brothers reemerged with them. I was taller than both, and the one named Phineas scowled when his mother cooed over my height. David and Daniel were twins as well, and ten like me, with curly brown mops that needed grooming. I was a sight taller than them too.
Jeremiah was the youngest, at six, and the only one who didn't seem to have a double. I was hopeful, for Mrs. Thomas's sake, that the six years after Jeremiah meant she wouldn't be having any more.
"We will try not to overwhelm you, Deborah, though we are very excited to have you here. It will be good to have another female in the house. You will help civilize my sons."
Someone snorted at that, though I could not be sure who. Mrs. Thomas turned and looped her arm through Reverend Conant's and announced that supper was ready.
"Wash and come inside, boys. Deborah, bring your things. I will show you where you'll sleep."
Mrs. Thomas turned her attention to Reverend Conant, and they walked into the house, chatting like old friends. Deacon Thomas was already leading the horse to the trough, and I hoisted my satchel, hiked my sagging stockings, and prepared to follow. The Thomas boys had fallen into quiet conference, and I froze, my back toward them, straining to hear.
"She's plain as a fence post."
"Shaped like one too."
"And her hair is the color of straw." Whoever was speaking snickered. "Maybe she could stand in the field and scare away the birds."
"Her eyes are pretty. I don't think I've ever seen eyes like hers."
"They're creepy! We'll have to set up a watch each night, to keep her from slaying us all in our beds."
I laughed at that, the bark of mirth surprising us all, and I turned to flash a wicked grin in their direction. Better they fear me than dismiss me.
"Her teeth are good," someone muttered, and I laughed again.
"She's downright peculiar," the oldest brother said, but the boy named Phineas had begun laughing too, and one by one, the others joined him.

I did not civilize the boys.
It might even be said that they radicalized me.
They slept in the big loft above the great room in berths built into the slope of the roof. Only David and Daniel, the youngest set of twins, slept in a regular bed, and it was hardly big enough for the two of them. They slept with their heads on opposite ends, their feet tickling each other's noses.
I was given a room of my own. It was but a closet, separated from the kitchen by a thin wall and a door, but it was big enough to hold a narrow berth, a pair of drawers, and a table a foot deep and two feet wide. And it was mine. I had my own bed, my own space. Being a female in a house full of sons had its benefits, even if one occupied the position of servant.
In the early days, the Thomas brothers kept their distance, eyeing me like I was a thief or a leper. It was Jeremiah, the littlest one, who warmed to me first. Perhaps it was that we were both loose ends, but he latched on to me quickly and made me his cohort. We were even born on the same day. I turned eleven the day he turned seven, and Jeremiah took that as a sign.
"Will you be my twin, Deborah?" Jeremiah asked, looking up at me with mournful eyes. "I have no one."
I laughed. "You have nine brothers, Jeremiah."
"But I'm the runt. I have no one who belongs to me. And you don't even have a ma or a pa or sisters and brothers."
"I do . . . somewhere."
"Well, what good is that?"
"Not much good, Jerry. Not much," I agreed, and my heart was oddly lighter for speaking the truth of it.
"So you can be my twin."
"And what do twins do?"
"A twin is the person you love most. Do you think you could love me most?"
"That will be easy."
"It will?" His toothy smile made my heart swell.
"It will."
"I love Ma an awful lot, but loving Ma is kinda like loving God. She's not really a person."
"Jeremiah!" I gasped. "She is too."
"I just mean . . . that she belongs to all of us. I want someone who just belongs to me," he repeated.
"All right. But I will try to love your brothers too, because that is what Reverend Conant says I must do."
"Even Nathaniel?" He looked doubtful. "And Phineas? He's mean. He told you no man would ever have you."
"No man will ever have me because I won't have him. And I won't need him."
"I'll have you, Deborah."
"You won't, Jeremiah. You're seven years old. And we're twins now, remember?"
"We don't look like twins . . . but that's okay, isn't it?" Jerry was small and dark, and I was tall and blonde, as different as night and day.
"Looks don't matter at all if your hearts are the same," I declared, hoping it was true.
He'd grinned at me like I'd given him the world. I suppose I had. At least the little bit of the world that was mine. I doted on him like a mother and treated him like a prince, and he got me into all manner of trouble I would not have dared get into alone. Jeremiah was the first to call me Rob—short for Deborah—and the reason I answered to it without hesitation later on.
The Thomases did not treat me poorly. I was not family, but I was valued. The work was never-ending with so many mouths to feed and bodies to clothe. Reverend Conant was right. I was greatly needed, and I could not be spared for school, but no matter how many chores I was given or tasks I completed, I could not shake the restlessness that consumed me. I squeezed the Thomas boys for every drop of learning they would share, often doing their chores and mine for a peek at their primers.
And Reverend Conant did not forget me.
Over the following year, he brought me several books. My favorites were a collection by Shakespeare and a four-part work called Travels into Several Remote Nations of the World. Reverend Conant called it Gulliver's Travels. I read it after supper to the brothers and was lauded as a great orator.
Reverend Conant was quite the orator himself, and I sat on the pews of the First Congregational Church with the Thomases and listened to him preach. He believed every word he said. In a way, he radicalized me too, if faith can be called radical. I've come to think it might be the most rebellious thing of all.
I don't know why Reverend Conant cared about my learning or my happiness, but he did, and it was because of him—a man who loved God and loved me, two ends of the mighty spectrum—that I began to see what a father's love looked like. To him I was simply Deborah, worthy of expectation and affection, and the things that mattered to him came to matter deeply to me.
"You must continue with your memorization. I have known no greater comfort in my life than to be able to call upon God's words when I am at a loss for my own," he would frequently say, and I memorized everything, just to show him I could. Just to hear his praise. He also found me a tutor of sorts, an "epistolatory correspondent" in Farmington, Connecticut.
"Her name is Elizabeth. She's my sister's daughter. My niece. She is grown, a young wife and a mother, and a woman of consequence. I have asked her if she will engage in correspondence with you, to expose you to the wider world, and she has happily agreed."
"What will I say?" I cried. I thrilled and quaked at the idea. I was not yet a woman and could not imagine what interest she would have in someone like me.
"You must say whatever you wish."
"Is she . . . kind?" I did not want to exchange letters with someone who would scold me.
"Yes. Very kind. You will learn from her what I can't teach and even what Mrs. Thomas can't teach."
"Mrs. Thomas can read and write, though her writing isn't fine," I said, wanting to defend the woman who treated me so well. It was not her fault she was not a woman of "consequence."
"Yes, but you live with Mrs. Thomas. No need to write her letters," Reverend Conant said, always judicious. I'd never heard him mutter a bad word about anyone, especially good people, and the Thomases were good people.
"How many letters may I write?" I asked, breathless.
"You may write as often as you like, as often as you're able."
"That will be a great many. I like practicing."
His eyes crinkled, but he didn't laugh at me. "Yes. I know you do. And Elizabeth will welcome your letters."
"What should I call her? Cousin Elizabeth . . . or Mrs. Paterson . . . or maybe I can call her Lady Elizabeth?" The thought thrilled me.
"She's not a duchess, Deborah. We don't have titles in America. I'm sure Elizabeth will do."
"Why do they have titles in England?"
"Tradition. England is married to tradition and enamored with station. It is different here. A man is what he makes of himself. It is not something bestowed on him." The reverend sounded so proud.
"And women too?"
"What?"
"Is a woman what she makes of herself?"
"Yes. A woman is what she makes of herself . . . with God's direction, of course. We all need God's direction."
"But what if we don't want to go in the direction God wants for us?"
"Then I suppose we're on our own. I shouldn't like to be on my own. Not completely."
"No," I whispered, though I often felt on my own. Completely. "What about King George?" I pressed.
"What about him?"
"You said we don't have titles here. But he is still our king. Isn't he? After the massacre in Boston, some are saying he shouldn't be."
"The only king I worship is the King of Kings, Lord of Lords, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace." Reverend Conant was frowning, and his jaw was tight.
I nodded seriously, but my heart was pounding too. Sylvanus Conant might be loyal, but he'd just spoken the words of a rebel.

March 27, 1771
Dear Miss Elizabeth,
My name is Deborah Samson. I'm certain you've been warned that I would be writing. I am not an accomplished writer, but I hope to be. I promise I will work very hard to make my letters interesting so you will enjoy reading them and allow me to continue. Reverend Conant tells me you are kind and beautiful and smart. I am not beautiful, but I try to be kind, and I am very smart.
I love to read, and I love to run, though I have little time for either, as there is always work to be done. But I read the Bible every day, and I am memorizing verses from Proverbs. Do you have a favorite? I will write one that I have mastered below, just for practice.
Proverbs 28:1, "The wicked flee when no man pursues: but the righteous are bold as a lion."
I told Mistress Thomas that running is not the same thing as fleeing. I thought that was quite bold, like a lion. She did not laugh, though I saw Phineas grin. I am quite rebellious, I fear. I attend the First Congregational Church with the Thomases. Your uncle Sylvanus preaches each week, and though I am very fond of him, and he is very convincing, the hours of inactivity are torture.
Last Sunday, I lied and said I wasn't feeling well and left before the final hour. I ran straight for the woods and spent a blessed afternoon climbing the trees and swinging from the branches. I know the path that cuts behind the tree line all the way back to the Thomas farm, and I have begun to clear it of roots and stones that would trip a girl up if she were running as fast as she were able—that girl being me.
Mrs. Thomas asked me what I was doing in my free time between chores and supper. I told her I was clearing the walking path. I even quoted scripture so she was assured it was a righteous endeavor. Proverbs 4:26 says, "Ponder the path of your feet, and let all your ways be established."
That is exactly what I have been doing. Pondering the path of my feet and establishing my ways. Mrs. Thomas seemed amiable to the activity, and even said it was a kind service to others who might use that path, but I did not tell her everything.
I call it my dashing path. I've claimed ownership of it since I've done all the work. It gives me a place to run where no one will see. I told the boys I could beat them all, maybe even Phineas, who is very fast, if I were allowed to race without my skirts hampering me. They have taken my challenge and presented me with a very worn pair of breeches that fit me quite well and a shirt to go with them. I can run so swiftly in them that I am convinced they are magic.
I hope you will not think me wicked, but if running is a sin, I will simply have to remain a sinner, as it is the only thing that quiets my mind.
Your obedient servant,
Deborah Samson
PS I will tell you all about the race, even if I do not win.

~ 2 ~
IT BECOMES NECESSARY
Though I kept my grievances close to my heart, putting them on the page was a waste of precious paper and ink. To sharpen a quill just to sharpen the axe did nothing to lessen the sting of my circumstances. I made lists of my weaknesses instead. Not to punish myself—that was not productive either. I made an accounting so I might better myself. The Bible made mention of weak things becoming strong, and I was determined to be strong. Each day, when I was not too weary to write, I would itemize the ways I fell short and count the ways I'd succeeded, always seeking to lengthen the latter column. But there were many things I could not teach myself, and I sought instruction wherever I could find it.
"The younger boys complain mightily about their lessons," I told Reverend Conant on one of his visits. "I help them as much as I can, but I wish I had lessons of my own."
Reverend Conant always timed his visits with supper. I couldn't blame him. He didn't have a wife. He claimed he was married to the gospel, and Mrs. Thomas said he "tended to everyone in his flock," but I liked to think he kept a special eye on me. He always asked me a string of questions when he stopped in.
Deacon Thomas and his sons had come in for the midday meal, but most had eaten and scattered, uninterested in the political talk that inevitably ensued when the reverend was present. Nathaniel and Benjamin still remained, eating as though they were starving, and Jeremiah had set up his tiny soldiers in the corner of the room and was plotting an ambush.
"She helps them too much," Mrs. Thomas chided. "They take advantage of her curiosity."
Deacon Thomas slathered butter on his bread. "They want to be outside. I was the same."
"I too want to be outside," I blurted. "But I am restless, even out of doors. I find I cannot get full, no matter what I do."
"You are not getting enough to eat?" Mrs. Thomas asked, stunned. Nathaniel and Benjamin even paused in their shoveling.
"I am. Yes." My cheeks warmed with embarrassment. "Pardon me, mistress. I do not mean food. I am hungry . . . to know."
"To know what, child?" Mrs. Thomas said.
"The world, I suppose. I want to go to Boston and to New York and to Philadelphia. I want to go to Paris and London and to places that have no names . . . at least not yet. Elizabeth went to London and Paris." I bit my lip and lowered my eyes. "And I would like to know God."
I added the last bit because I felt I must. It was true . . . just not as true as the first part. Deacon Thomas was frowning at me, and Mrs. Thomas was wringing her hands.
"Continue to study Holy Writ," Reverend Conant responded. "There is no better way to know Him. It is a marvelous gift to have His words. You don't have to go anywhere. He is right there."
"But I want to go somewhere," I confessed.
Reverend Conant laughed, and I loved him for it.
"Proverbs nineteen says the soul that be without knowledge is not good," I argued. "It is sinful not to educate oneself." I thought my reasoning sound.
"Proverbs nineteen also says he that hasteth with his feet sinneth," Deacon Thomas quoted, his cheeks full. "I'd say you're in trouble, Deborah." His tone was mild, and his eyes did not even lift from his trencher, and for a moment all was hushed. Then laughter engulfed the entire table.
"Pa got you good, didn't he, Rob?" Nathaniel chuckled. It was all they ever called me.
"Now stop that," Mrs. Thomas reprimanded, but her lips were twitching too. "I don't know why you call Deborah Rob. It is not becoming at all. A woman deserves a woman's name."
"Are you a woman, Rob?" Jeremiah lifted his head from his toys, astonished, and the laughter grew.
No, I did not civilize the boys. Not at all.
"I will bring you more books. Perhaps that will help your wanderlust. And here is a letter from Elizabeth. A very long one," the reverend reassured me when Benjamin and Nat finally rose and left the table.
I snatched it up, begging to be excused, and Mrs. Thomas waved me off while reminding me that there were chores that still needed to be done and to not be long. I rushed to my little room and shut the door behind me, but I could still hear the conversation between Reverend Conant and Mr. and Mrs. Thomas.
"She is headstrong, Sylvanus," Deacon Thomas said, and I made a note to add that to my list of faults. "And proud. And she cannot always hold her tongue."
"I only hope she is a blessing to you," Reverend Conant replied.
"I cannot complain," Mrs. Thomas said. "Not at all. I don't know how I ever got by without her. She accomplishes far more—and does it well—than I do in a day. I've never seen a person more driven."
"But driven toward what?" Deacon Thomas grumbled. He watched me with trepidation when he looked at me at all, and he'd hardly said two words to me in the two years I'd lived under his roof.
He was wrong, though.
I could hold my tongue.
I held it more often than not. He would be appalled if he knew all the things I didn't say.
"She has great energy," Mrs. Thomas was saying. "She handles the spinning wheel like a master and has a gift at the loom. Nathaniel has taught her how to shoot. He says she is already a better aim than he is. In truth, there is little she can't do."
I smiled at that, despite the sting in Deacon Thomas's criticism, and turned away from my eavesdropping to the letter in my hands. Elizabeth didn't write as often as I wrote her. I'd written dozens but sent only a few, as to not abuse her kindness or trample on her goodwill, but this letter was delightfully long.
She had lovely handwriting, like geese in formation, winging across the page. I had begun trying to copy it, to train my hand to pattern hers. My writing looked like waves in a brewing storm, rough and relentless. Like me. Funny how a person's penmanship revealed so much.
April 15, 1772
Dearest Deborah,
You make me laugh, darling girl, and I read your letters with both wonder and glee. It is odd to think we are but eight years apart. In some ways, I feel ancient compared to you, though I am convinced you could instruct me in many ways. I have scoured Proverbs for something to inspire you, but found myself giggling, trying to imagine how you might apply each one.
I read your letters to my John. Even he, a man who has never done an irresponsible thing in his life, had a good laugh when you recounted the episode of the magic breeches. I would have liked to see the Thomas boys being trounced in that footrace. You've made me curious about donning a pair and finding a dashing path of my own.
I do hope someday you will experience the joy of turning a gentleman's head with more than your speed or strength. You have such a fine mind and a strong will, and your character shines through your letters. I suspect you will grow to be a woman who inspires much admiration. Do not be so quick to dismiss the blessings or power of our sex, my young friend. My grandmother told me once that men may run the world, but women rule men. Something to ponder, certainly. You must let the brothers win sometimes, just to encourage them. I find men are more apt to let us play if they believe they will triumph.
Uncle Sylvanus tells me you are the brightest girl he's ever met. He frets that you are unable to attend school but says there is little any country school could teach you. There is little I can teach you! Still, you must ask me any questions you have, and I will labor to answer them in a way that both instructs and entertains, as you have done for me.
Your constant friend,
Elizabeth
PS Proverbs 31 is my favorite, though I recognize I am at a different juncture in my life than you are. I particularly like this section:
"She opens her mouth with wisdom; and in her tongue is the law of kindness. She looks well to the ways of her household, and eats not the bread of idleness. Her children arise up, and call her blessed; her husband also, and he praises her."
I folded the letter carefully and put it in the growing stack of communications from Elizabeth. I had so few possessions, and I cherished each one. My Bible, the one my mother had given me, sat beside the pile. My mother had neatly recorded her lineage on the inside cover from the marriage of William Bradford and Alice Carpenter in 1623 to the union of Deborah Bradford and Jonathan Samson in 1751. My mother was a Deborah too.
I'd added my siblings—Robert, Ephraim, Sylvia, Dorothy—and myself in a neat line beneath my parents' names, an effort to connect us to the branch and to each other, even though we'd been snipped and scattered.
I turned to Proverbs 31 and read it through, trying to imagine myself being a woman more valuable than rubies, a woman who spoke with wisdom and clothed herself in honor and strength. I clothed myself in homespun cloth and borrowed breeches, at least when I could get away with it. The boys had never tattled on me, though Phineas had threatened to after I'd bested him in a wrestling match.
I certainly did not eat the bread of idleness. That should count for something.
I closed the Bible and took out my ledger. I added headstrong to my list of faults and stared at it before crossing it out and adding it to the other side. I wrote Of strong mind. That's what I was. I was of strong mind. And that was not a sin.
I left the ledger open to dry and left my room, determined to looketh well to the ways of the household, at least until I was eighteen.

Middleborough was a small community about thirty miles south of Boston, but the people boasted two churches: the First Congregational Church, where Reverend Conant presided, and the Third Baptist Church, which seemed to have an equal and passionate following. I once asked what the difference was, besides the minister, and Mrs. Thomas said one was true and one was not. I asked which one, and Mrs. Thomas was not amused, though I wasn't trying to be humorous.
I did like that there was a choice and no one was forced to attend either—except if one was a child or an indentured servant—though choosing not to attend one or the other seemed to make folks wary and strain relationships. Both read the Bible, both sang similar hymns, and both prayed to a similar God, according to Reverend Conant. The reverend seemed more concerned by the presence of British troops in Boston than he was by the existence of another church in Middleborough, so I didn't concern myself overmuch either, though my insatiable curiosity had me listening to debates in the public square after Sunday meetings when most of the other young people wandered away.
But the arguments about which church was true and which version of God even truer paled in comparison to the political fervor that had gripped the colonies, or at least Massachusetts. In a letter, Elizabeth claimed it was everywhere.
July 28, 1773
My dear Deborah,
Many of John's associates and our friends want no part of the rebellion brewing in Boston, but as John says, the trouble in one colony affects all colonies. A clear delineation is brewing between the wealthy and the common folk, those who don't profit from trade with Britain and who resent the taxes, regulation, and orders from on high.
John worries what the troubles will mean for our future and the future of every colony. He says oppression not resisted eventually becomes slavery, and he has begun preparations to move the family to a place called Lenox in western Massachusetts. His cousin lives there, and John wants the family away from the conflict if there is to be one, though he is likely to get pulled into the fray, wherever we go. He has wide shoulders, a level head, and a patriotic heart.
Lenox sits on the edge of the frontier, and I confess to not being enthusiastic about the move. But I suppose if John's mother and his sisters and their families come with us, I will not mind it. Of course my daughters will keep me busy.
I cannot fathom how circumstances continue to devolve. Surely, England does not want war. John says the British do not think the colonists capable of prolonged resistance or organized revolt. They are disdainful of us and call us pestilents. A certain British lord, I cannot remember his name at present, boasted that he could flatten all the rebellion in the colonies by nightfall with a single regiment and not suffer a wrinkle or a scratch.
You are so young, and I do not want to frighten you. I often forget that you are but thirteen! Your questions are those of a scholar, and I confess to not having the answers much of the time. Perhaps I will entreat John to write to you on subjects in which I am not well versed.
We must also write of simpler things, more pleasant things. There is little you or I can do about the trouble brewing, so we must not let it darken our correspondence. The doctor has just confirmed I am with child again and we want to be settled in Lenox before the baby is born. Our home is almost finished. John promises it will be grand, and I will bring culture and civilization to that place, though given the size of the town, I don't think that will be difficult.
I remain your constant friend,
Elizabeth

The Patersons moved to Lenox and Elizabeth gave birth to her third daughter, Ruth, named after John's favorite sister. Baby Ruth joined four-year-old Hannah and two-year-old Polly in the Paterson brood. John had four sisters, all older than he, and Elizabeth said he was destined to be surrounded by females. She still managed to write regularly, though the letters were slow, and I often wrote three to every one of hers.
I had only my own thoughts to fill the pages, but she didn't seem to mind. She indulged my analysis of Shakespeare and offered some of her own. She shared my disappointment in Othello—he killed Desdemona!—and enjoyed my defense of poor Shylock from The Merchant of Venice, though she did not share my sense of injustice in his case. I had a soft spot when it came to the outcast, even when the outcast was portrayed as the villain. I thought it most likely because I was one as well.
The following May, news of the Boston Port Bill reached American shores. Parliament had proclaimed all ports in New England closed. Nothing in and nothing out. Deacon Thomas said the British meant to kill the resistance, to force everyone out and punish the merchants for skirting their regulations.
The king revoked the Massachusetts Bay Charter, which was essentially the colony's license to operate independently from the Crown in any manner. All the governing officials in the colony were paid and appointed by the British. No trials would take place in Massachusetts, and no meeting, assembly, or speech would be allowed without permission from the Crown's governor.
They'd also demanded the people quarter the British troops in their homes, and that alarmed Mrs. Thomas most of all. She was certain a regiment would march into Middleborough any day and seize the house and farm.
The "Intolerable Acts" was what people were calling them, but such things had been happening as long as I could remember, and the people had tolerated them. I didn't know a time when people didn't complain about the Crown. No taxation without representation was something people loved to say, and the previous December, a group of rebels that called themselves the Sons of Liberty had climbed aboard three ships in Boston Harbor, ships owned by the British East India Company, and dumped all the tea into the water to protest King George's ban on tea imports from anywhere but England.
It was all very exciting.

